Parameter Efficient Finetuning (PEFT) method, most of the memory footprint for LLM finetuning
comes from activation gradients and not from the learned LoRA parameters. For a 7B LLaMA
model trained on FLAN v2 with a batch size of 1, with LoRA weights equivalent to commonly used
0.2% of the original model weights[28, 37], the LoRA input gradients have a memory footprint
of 567 MB while the LoRA parameters take up only 26 MB. With gradient checkpointing [9], the
input gradients reduce to an average of 18 MB per sequence making them more memory intensive
than all LoRA weights combined. In comparison, the 4-bit base model consumes 5,048 MB of
memory. This highlights that gradient checkpointing is important but also that aggressively reducing
the amount of LoRA parameter yields only minor memory benefits. This means we can use more
adapters without significantly increasing the overall training memory footprint (see Appendix G
for a detailed breakdown). As discussed later, this is crucial for recovering full 16-bit precision
performance.

3   QL O RA Finetuning
QL O RA achieves high-fidelity 4-bit finetuning via two techniques we propose—4-bit NormalFloat
(NF4) quantization and Double Quantization. Additionally, we introduce Paged Optimizers, to
prevent memory spikes during gradient checkpointing from causing out-of-memory errors that have
traditionally made finetuning on a single machine difficult for large models.
QL O RA has one low-precision storage data type, in our case usually 4-bit, and one computation data
type that is usually BFloat16. In practice, this means whenever a QL O RA weight tensor is used, we
dequantize the tensor to BFloat16, and then perform a matrix multiplication in 16-bit.
We now discuss the components of QL O RA followed by a formal definition of QL O RA.
4-bit NormalFloat Quantization The NormalFloat (NF) data type builds on Quantile Quantization
[15] which is an information-theoretically optimal data type that ensures each quantization bin has an
equal number of values assigned from the input tensor. Quantile quantization works by estimating
the quantile of the input tensor through the empirical cumulative distribution function.
The main limitation of quantile quantization is that the process of quantile estimation is expensive.
Therefore fast quantile approximation algorithms, such as SRAM quantiles [15], are used to estimate
them. Due to the approximate nature of these quantile estimation algorithms, the data type has large
quantization errors for outliers, which are often the most important values.
Expensive quantile estimates and approximation errors can be avoided when input tensors come from
a distribution fixed up to a quantization constant. In such cases, input tensors have the same quantiles
making exact quantile estimation computationally feasible.
Since pretrained neural network weights usually have a zero-centered normal distribution with
standard deviation σ (see Appendix F), we can transform all weights to a single fixed distribution by
scaling σ such that the distribution fits exactly into the range of our data type. For our data type, we
set the arbitrary range [−1, 1]. As such, both the quantiles for the data type and the neural network
weights need to be normalized into this range.
The information theoretically optimal data type for zero-mean normal distributions with arbitrary
standard deviations σ in the range [−1, 1] is computed as follows: (1) estimate the 2k + 1 quantiles
of a theoretical N (0, 1) distribution to obtain a k-bit quantile quantization data type for normal distri-
butions, (2) take this data type and normalize its values into the [−1, 1] range, (3) quantize an input
weight tensor by normalizing it into the [−1, 1] range through absolute maximum rescaling.
Once the weight range and data type range match, we can quantize as usual. Step (3) is equivalent to
rescaling the standard deviation of the weight tensor to match the standard deviation of the k-bit data
type. More formally, we estimate the 2k values qi of the data type as follows:
                                                                                 
                                   1                   i                     i+1
                            qi =           QX                    + QX                     ,            (4)
                                   2                2k + 1                  2k + 1

where QX (·) is the quantile function of the standard normal distribution N (0, 1). A problem for
a symmetric k-bit quantization is that this approach does not have an exact representation of zero,
which is an important property to quantize padding and other zero-valued elements with no error. To


                                                         4
